Good morning.
I'm Nate Begemann.
I'm here to talk to you today
about iOS game technologies
and some of the fantastic new
things we have for you in iOS 5.
It is a fantastic time to make games,
and I'm thrilled to see so many
people here in the room today.
We have seen you guys have such
success already writing games for iOS,
and we have some wonderful new
things to share with you here today.
And we're excited to see you guys adopt
the things that we'll be unveiling
and write even awesomer games.
Today in Part 1,
we'll be talking about four technologies.
First is Game Center.
Game Center lets your games connect
with your customers and helps them
play with their friends and make
gaming an awesome social experience.
The second thing we're going to
talk today about is the cloud
and how cloud storage is like the
most amazing thing for games ever.
And I'm super excited to show
some examples of how we're
going to use that today.
The third thing we're going to talk about
is GL Kit and how we're bringing the
power of OpenGL ES 2.0 to your games,
even if you're not an OpenGL ES expert.
And God knows I'm not.
And the last thing we're going to
talk today about is AirPlay and
how we can get your game on more
displays and in front of more people.
In part two, the session after this,
we're going to talk about game design,
and some of the things you
need to think about up front
going into writing your game.
We believe that everyone has a
great idea for a game in their head,
so even those of you who don't
have a game on the store yet,
you'll definitely want
to stick around for that.
And you'll learn about great
audio design in your games,
how to handle game design for iOS
devices in such a way that the input
is natural and easy for people to use,
the things you need to think about
writing a quality game for iOS,
and all the little
details that go into that,
and lots of other cool things that
Graham will share with you then.
So let's talk about Game Center.
As I mentioned,
Game Center is like the hub of the
social experience for games on iOS.
And in iOS 5,
we have a few cool new features that
we've added directly to Game Center.
The first is profile photos.
And profile photos is actually, you know,
it doesn't sound super exciting,
but it's really cool because when
you get that list of your friends
up there and you see their photo,
you immediately connect
with that person and say,
like, whoa, that's my friend Matt.
He's right there.
I'm going to play a game with him.
Rather than dealing
with everything through,
like, gamer tags or that kind of thing.
As you saw yesterday,
we've built game recommendations
right into Game Center.
So now more people can find the awesome
games that you've written right in
Game Center after they've played
whatever game they're playing now.
And we think that this is a great way
to keep people coming back to games in
Game Center and help them keep finding
new great games that you're writing.
And the final thing we've added
is friend recommendations.
You may not know that your
friends are on Game Center.
There's 50 million people, as you heard.
And so we'll help you find players
to match up with your customers.
So that they can keep having
great experiences in your games.
I know one of my favorite things
about gaming is that it's competitive.
And so I spend a lot of time
looking at leaderboards in
Game Center and trying to,
you know, beat my friend's time in
Tiny Wings and that kind of thing.
And so we've added some great
things to keep people interested
in leaderboards in iOS 5.
You can see the people in leaderboards.
You can add them as a friend directly.
You can rate games.
I know one of the things that
you guys are super interested in
is getting that awesome feedback
for your games that you so,
you know, excellently deserve.
And so now users can rate your
game right in Game Center.
You don't need to pop up alerts saying,
please rate my game.
And so, you know, that's there.
And finally,
we've added custom category icons
to the leaderboards themselves.
And this is a way to let you just
sort of distinguish the categories
for your app rather than use the
defaults that every app uses.
[Transcript missing]
So we're really excited to
see what you guys are going
to do with turn-based gaming.
But just to sort of refresh your memory,
we're going to walk through word for word
and show you how turn-based gaming works.
So here you can see we've got our iPad
up and we've got the Match interface.
And, you know,
this is sort of the standard
Game Center interface you can see.
Here you can see right at the top,
your game gets to specify
how many players you want
to support for the match.
Word for word supports
two to four players.
In the seed build you got,
you support up to four players,
but in the final iOS 5,
we'll support up to 16
players in turn-based gaming.
So you can really go nuts with this.
And so down here,
you can see we can either auto-match a
player or you can invite some friends.
So let's click that button.
And here you can see, you know,
we've got a list of our friends
with their profile photos.
You can see, like, awesome.
I want to invite those people
because they look great.
And so we'll click two of
them and add them to our game.
And then we'll hit the next button.
And so here you can see they've
popped right up in our little
match that we're about to start.
And if someone wanted to,
they could rate your game right here.
So we'll go ahead and get started.
So as you saw yesterday, you know,
you've got your familiar game
paradigm of letter tiles on a board.
And we're going to place them down and,
you know, score some points.
This is where the tiles came from.
There's the word.
And we're going to hit
our next button here.
And we spelled Ruby for
a bunch of points,
which is awesome.
And so then, when I hit that next button,
it's going to send a
notification to someone else,
and it's going to appear at the
top of the screen with the new
notification user interface,
and of course, they're going to accept.
And so then it's going
to bring up Game Center,
and it's going to say, hey,
someone is trying to
invite you to a game.
And so all the pending matches that
they have are going to show up here.
And they're going to click it,
and then they're going to
play a word and hit next.
And their word was worth
fewer points than our word,
which is awesome.
And so then the notification
passes to the third player.
So as you'll notice,
the notification only shows up
on the player whose turn it is.
You do not get a notification
when transfer controls between
two players who are not you.
So your apps can poll for that if you
want to show some kind of notification
as to whose turn it is currently,
but you won't get a notification
from Game Center for that.
So the third player is going to
take their turn and hit next.
And now you can see instead of
getting a game invite notification,
we actually get that turn notification
from Game Center a little differently,
but that's what it looks like.
So now that you've, you know,
had word for word
refreshed in your memory,
let's look at some code and, like,
you know, the basics of turn-based gaming
and what that looks like.
Well,
Game Center and turn-based gaming is all
based on this turn-based match object.
So you get a GK turn-based match,
and just like any regular Cocoa object,
you're going to, you know,
alloc and init that, nothing special.
And most of the interaction
through your app is based on
this turn-based event handler.
And so wherever you want to put
the game logic for your app,
you just have to, you know,
find that class and set it as the
delegate of the turn-based event handler.
And then you'll handle
three kinds of events.
You're going to handle
invites from other people.
You're going to handle turns,
so making it become your turn.
And you're going to handle
the end of the match.
So if the other person decided that,
you know, they were scared because you
had an awesome score and just
declined your invitation,
or if, you know, you won or they won,
you would get an
end-of-turn notification.
So in order to transfer
control to somebody,
let's look at the basic
steps you have to do.
First, you have to decide whose
turn it's going to be next.
And so, for instance,
like the golf example I mentioned,
you know,
control would transfer to whoever's
ball was farthest from the pin.
And so you'd call some code to figure
that out and get their player index,
you know, zero-based,
zero to however many
players there are minus one.
In the word-for-word
example we just threw up,
you know, we're going to just, you know,
we're going to just rotate
through the players.
So, you know, that's, like, super easy.
And then you're going to take that index
and you're going to ask Game Center for
the Game Center participant,
the GK turn-based participant,
who is at that index in the
array of players in the match.
And that object is what you'll use to
communicate with Game Center to say,
hey, I want control to go to this person.
And let's see what that looks like.
So in our game where we had that arrow
that transferred control to the player,
you're going to ask the Game Center for
the Game Center participant,
the GK turn-based participant,
who is at that index in the
array of players in the match.
And then you're going to
ask Game Center for the
Game Center participant,
the GK turn-based participant,
who is at that index in the
array of players in the match.
And let's see what that looks like.
So, you know,
we're going to ask Game Center for
the Game Center participant,
the GK turn-based participant,
who is at that index in the
array of players in the match.
And let's see what that looks like.
So, you know,
we're going to ask Game Center for
the Game Center participant,
the GK turn-based
[Transcript missing]
So now that we have this data,
this NSData blob, it's 4K or less,
basically what we're going to do is
call that GKTurn-based match object that
we've stored in our game class and say,
end turn with next participant,
and we're going to hand it that
participant that we generated,
the person whose turn it is next.
We're going to hand it our
game data that we calculated,
and we're going to give it a
block for a completion handler.
And just the important thing
to recognize here is that this
block runs asynchronously,
and so you won't necessarily
have this block run microseconds
after you make this call.
It may come back at some
later point and say,
hey, there was an error,
I couldn't deliver this.
Hey, there was an error,
the other person actually
resigned earlier on their turn,
and you're just figuring this out now.
Or there might be no error,
in which case everything's cool.
You remember when we registered
our game class as the delegate?
This is one of those functions in that
protocol that you need to implement.
So when it's your turn,
this function will get called.
And again,
you're just going to do whatever
you need to unpack that turn data,
and then update your game
state to take that turn,
and refresh your UI,
showing that that turn has been taken.
It's really simple.
I mean,
there's no sort of standard code in here.
You know,
it's going to vary based on your app.
But it's really a pretty simple action.
So, like I said, you can send up to four
kilobytes of turn data.
And that doesn't sound like a lot,
but it actually works for a lot of games.
If it really can't work for your game,
each match does have a unique ID.
You can use it to index into some
database or use it as a key for cloud
storage or whatever you want to do.
And again, you only get notifications
when it is becoming your turn
or someone is inviting you.
So it will become your turn
when you accept the match.
You have to poll Game Center if you want
to find out that transfer has controlled
between two players who aren't you.
So if all this sounds like something
that you can't wait to put in your app,
we have four sessions coming up later
in the week on Game Center and all the
ways that you can incorporate it into
your app and use turn-based gaming.
We hope that you will go to those
sessions because we think that
Game Center is actually pretty amazing.
And not only makes your apps better,
but I as a game player love
playing Game Center games.
It keeps me interested longer.
So, you know, again,
Game Center -- gaming is
about not just playing games,
but about playing games
with your friends.
And so Game Center really
helps with that.
You've seen the new
leaderboard features because,
you know, competitive gaming,
keeps people interested.
Achievements help people get through
and find all the content that you've
spent so long putting in your game.
And so by adopting achievements,
you can make sure that they're
driven to go find it and keep playing
your game as long as possible.
And you can see with turn-based match,
we've added an interesting new way to
add multiplayer experiences to gaming
in a way that works for casual gaming
and that I can just pick up my device,
play a turn and put it down
and not have to be -- you know,
carve out time in my schedule to, like,
have a match with somebody.
And so, again,
we are super excited to see what you guys
are going to do with turn-based gaming.
My favorite part of this presentation
is actually iCloud because it
solves so many problems that are
actually fairly specific to gaming.
And, you know, I'd like to run through
a few of those with you.
But first, you know,
just sort of an overview of iCloud.
It does automatic syncing.
You don't have to tell it,
please push my data up to the cloud
now or please go get some data.
The storage is per user.
So you saw the turn-based
match data was 4 kilobytes,
and that was between users.
Cloud Storage is for one user,
but it can span multiple domains.
And so you wouldn't use
Cloud Storage to say,
I want to send, you know,
my friend some data,
but you'll see why this is
perfect for gaming in a second.
You can store data between devices.
So, for instance, if I have -- if I'm
playing a game and I just,
you know, got to a new point in the game,
passed some hard boss
on my iPhone on the bus,
and I'm like, awesome,
and I put that down,
and I go to work and I pick up my iPad,
and I'm like, oh, man,
I would have to play that all over again.
Well, with the cloud,
your game state can just be automatically
updated between all your devices,
so you can move from device to device
and never lose your place in a game.
You can also store data between
different versions of the same app or
even between two wholly separate apps.
So, for instance,
if you have a free version of an app,
you can
And you -- and someone
buys a paid version,
all their data can go with them
because you can use the same cloud
storage identifiers for those two apps.
And so, you know,
this is something I think
users will really love.
So when they buy an app or maybe you
have a collection of games where you
all want to share some shared state,
cloud storage will allow you to do that.
And it works between platforms.
So the focus of this talk, you know,
is primarily on iOS technologies.
But this works on Lion, too.
And so you'll see how these
classes can be adopted.
You know, for instance, if you had some,
you know, role-playing game on an iOS
device and you wanted to write a,
you know,
my backpack organizer app for the Mac,
and they could go in and
arrange their items and buy
potions and stuff like that.
And then when they picked
up their iPad again,
it could all just be there.
And so, you know,
really much like turn-based gaming,
the only limit is your imagination
on using this kind of stuff.
So let's look at some code and just,
like, how super simple this is to use.
Well, the first thing you're going
to do is get a connection.
And thank God for Xcode
4's auto-complete,
because this class is kind of long.
You've got NS ubiquitous key value
store-- and just wait until you see the
notification name-- and so basically,
you're just going to ask
for the default store,
and you'll get a connection to the cloud.
And you'll keep using this object
to refer to your cloud connection
throughout the lifetime of your app.
And so just sort of the most basic thing,
the easiest way to use the cloud,
are key value pairs.
Yesterday,
you saw a lot of cool examples about
document-based use of the cloud.
But I think key value pairs
are really easy to use.
And so if you just wanted to
set some flag in your app,
you could say, hey,
the player has set true
for my awesome bool key,
or whatever you want that to represent.
You know, it's a really simple API.
So let's talk about specifically
how it might apply to games
in the Game State example.
Here you can see we're using NSKeyed
Archiver to pack up Game State.
And we'll talk about that in just
a sec and why it's awesome and why
you should adopt that probably for
structured data like Game State.
But here you can see we're
just generating an NSData,
so just some blob of bytes.
And unlike turn-based gaming, you know,
there's no 4K limit here.
You know, the user has some amount of
free storage on the cloud,
but, you know, really just take whatever
space you need to upload that.
And again, you just got a key value
pair mechanism here.
We're going to set that data for my red
Game State and away to the cloud it goes.
So I mentioned, you know,
this NSK archiver thing.
Some of you may not be
familiar with Cocoa.
And so this is something that's
come across from AppKit on Mac OS X.
And basically it's a way for you to
add a platform-agnostic data encoding
scheme to basically any class you want.
And so whether you're transferring
data between a 32 and 64-bit device,
between an iOS device and Lion,
it's not even Lion specific,
but it is just really easy to use.
Basically, your class,
your Game State class,
is going to subscribe to
the NSCoding protocol,
and you're going to
implement two functions,
encodeWithCoder and initWithCoder.
And basically,
this is a way to turn your class
into an NSData object and then
inflate an NSData object back into...
your game state.
So what does this look like?
Well, encode with coder is going to
be called anytime someone calls,
you know, archive data.
And so you get an
NSCoder object passed to you,
and you can just basically enumerate
down the member variables in
your class using whatever the
appropriate encode routine is,
encode integer for a standard, you know,
like C int type, encode data for NSData,
encode dictionary for, you know,
key value dictionary, that kind of thing.
And you reference, you know,
your member variable and then the
key you want it looked up under.
And you know, the same, as you'll see,
we're going to unarchive one of
these things in a second when
we come back from the cloud.
Enit with coder is going to be called.
Remember to initialize your
super class and then go ahead
and get your values back.
It's just really easy to use.
use.
So let's register for this cloud
notification so that when I'm
playing a game on my iPad and my
iPhone is still awake or whatever,
we can be told that, hey,
the data changed and
you should go update it.
We're going to get our
default notification center,
which is just the standard
Cocoa Touch way of
registering for notifications.
My app class is whatever app class
you want to handle that notification.
Handle sync data changed is the
function we're going to use to
respond to the notification,
and we'll see that in a second.
And here's that great notification name.
The NS ubiquitous key value store
did change externally notification.
So it's only 56 characters.
And then we're going to pass
that Cloud Store object to it in
case we wanted to refer to it.
later when we're handling
the notification.
So this is what's going to get called.
And you can see, again, you know,
this NSNotification, you can pull that
CloudStore object out of it,
and then use it to go pull
out the blob of data that was
encoding my rad game state.
And so that's going to pull
down that data out of the
Cloud object that got synced.
And then you're going to
call NSKeyedUnarchiver,
unarchive object with data,
and that's going to call initWithCoder
with that data and basically it will
inflate back to your game state.
And we think that this is just a
really easy way for you to use the
Cloud to solve a basic problem that
a lot of people have with gaming.
And it will make sort of the casual
gaming experience across multiple
iOS devices or multiple apps,
you know, a lot of people have.
So this is just a really
easy way to do that.
And it's going to be
really helpful to you.
And I think that's a really
good way to go about this.
And I think this is going to be a
really good way to go about this.
So if you're interested in doing this,
I'm sure you've seen a lot of these apps.
So much better.
So you're probably
interested in adopting this.
And so there are three
sessions later in the week.
Two later today.
And one on Wednesday.
So hope to see you there.
And again, you know, I covered, you know,
the basic game state life
cycle with the Cloud.
But just like turn-based gaming,
there are so many more
ways that you can use this.
If you have app preferences, for example,
you know, people have set some kind
of gamma in your app.
Or they want the Y axis inverted
in some flight simulator.
You can transfer those preferences
through the Cloud to all the devices.
You can handle app statistics.
And, you know,
we hear stories all the time
of how statistics keep people
super interested in games.
And it's a little different
than achievements.
But, you know, you can record anything.
Like the number of times I have died
in Minesweeper on the fourth mine.
Or, you know,
the number of times I have played poker.
anything that may not actually be
an achievement or a leaderboard.
But, you know,
you can make sure that those
statistics get across to all devices.
People love that kind of stuff.
It makes that human connection
between them and your game.
You can even do, like,
some cool personalization stuff.
So you could imagine, for instance,
that you have some kind
of doodling app or,
you know, paint app on your iPhone.
And you want to paint up some cool logo
for a car and sync that to the cloud.
And you can go play your
racing game on an iPad.
That decal has already
been applied to the car.
And you can see the art that you drew
right on the hood as you're racing.
And, you know, so you can do so many
cool things with this.
And we're excited to see what
you end up coming up with.
The third thing I'm going to talk today
about is GL Kit and how OpenGL ES 2.0
can now be made super simple.
For those of you who are
already writing amazing shaders,
that's great.
Please keep doing that.
We love it.
It makes your games look awesome.
But this is a way that a lot of you
will finally be able to access the power
of OpenGL ES without being experts.
So it does a number of things.
There's UI Kit integration.
So rather than needing to set up
OpenGL content as an OpenGL layer
in a core animation layer tree,
there's now just a standard GL Kit view.
You can throw in a view hierarchy
like any other Cocoa Touch view,
and it'll just take care of
presenting the frame buffer,
making sure that the performance is good,
running the animation loop,
all that great stuff.
There's a fast math library.
I know we've been asking you for a couple
of years now to get off OpenGL ES 1.1
and transition to OpenGL ES 2.0 so
that you can untap the full power of
the iPad 2 and other modern devices.
One of the downsides of that is that
OpenGL ES 1.1 actually had a lot of
nice sort of matrix math built in,
a lot of state that you
didn't have to think about.
Well, we've recreated that in GL Kit so
that you can just easily transition
off OpenGL ES 1.1 to 2.0.
Without having to worry, like,
how do I write matrix multiplication
that will actually perform
well on an ARM processor?
No, you don't need to know.
We'll just take care of that.
[Transcript missing]
It seemed hard to do at the time,
and so I went back to
this example and thought,
how would I look at this code and do
some of those same things using GLKit,
just so you can kind of see where
we're going over the last couple years.
Well, the first thing I wanted to look
at was texture loading and how that
was actually not that easy to do.
So we didn't have compressed
textures in this app.
We just had, you know,
some little colored
rectangles and a ball,
you know, a PNG of the ball.
Or maybe, you know,
a PNG of the earth you
could use as the ball,
that kind of thing.
And so OpenGL doesn't really
know anything about UIKit or
the rest of Cocoa Touch.
And so let's walk through
what you had to do to get that
image into an OpenGL texture.
Well, first you had to go dig
it out of your bundle.
So you had to say, "Hey, UI image,
go find this resource," and then
turn it into a CG image because we're
going to need to get the bytes out.
And so then we asked Core Graphics, "Hey,
how big is this thing?"
If I succeeded in getting it,
we need to create some storage for it,
because OpenGL sucks in all its
texture data through arrays of bytes.
So we're going to allocate some storage,
knowing, of course,
that the pixel values are
one byte per component and
that there are four of them.
Then we're going to create
a CG bitmap context,
which tells Core Graphics how to
reason about this data as a texture.
We're going to draw
that CG image into it,
hopefully doing the right thing.
And then we're going to
get into OpenGL and say,
"Hey, generate me a texture name,
bind it to this texture,
and then render these bytes
into that texture." This doesn't
sound like a lot of fun.
I didn't like doing it.
And so this is one of the primary
things that can be made really easy.
So this is the entirety of the
GL kit doing the same thing.
Basically, we're going to ask NSURL for
that bundle resource.
So you can say, hey, where is it?
We're going to ask GL Kit,
which has this texture
loader helper class,
to say, "Hey, given this URL,
give me a texture info object."
And that texture info object
contains all sorts of stuff,
but one of the things it contains
is the OpenGL texture ID,
referenced by the texture name accessor,
so that it took care of
generating that texture ID,
binding the texture to it,
getting your data into it,
and you can just use that.
Other things in there
would be like the width,
the height, the color channel ordering,
that kind of thing.
You can query this texture info
object for any one of those things.
So here's sort of our
one line of code example,
space for readability.
But you can see it's really
actually pretty easy.
So you don't need to write your own
helper class that knows how to do all
this stuff and handle error cases.
GL Kit will just do it for you.
And one of the things I'd like
to encourage you guys to do,
here you can see in this example that
we've been working with PingFile.
But GL Kit actually supports
loading PVR to compress textures
directly from a bundle resource.
So if you have the means to
go generate those textures,
please do, because they will make the
GPU perform better by using less
memory bandwidth than a one byte
per component texture like Ping.
So the other thing you saw that
we did was we had that nice kind
of spotlight around the ball.
This was actually, you know, I mean,
it was a little bit of a
challenge to get the ball to work.
But we had to load this
background texture of bumps.
And we had to set that as the input to
the sampler so that we could actually,
you know, lighten up a portion of
it where the ball was.
We had to tell GL to use the
light program that we'd written,
which comprised a vertex
and fragment shader.
We had to set some
variables in that program,
for instance,
for the position of the ball,
what texture the sampler is referring to,
the sampler being the OpenGL way
that you sort of index into an image.
And then we had to make the GL call
to draw arrays to take that vertex
data and run the program on it
and do our per-pixel lighting.
So here's this lighting
program that we wrote,
which is so obviously drawing a,
you know,
20-pixel light spotlight under a ball.
And so, you know,
I can walk you through this,
but basically all we're doing is
figuring out how far any pixel is from
the center of the ball and attenuating
a spotlight and then blending in
that light color with the background.
And so this is great.
If you want to do this stuff,
you can do really powerful
things that GLKit is not going to
provide for you out of the box.
But for something
simple like a spotlight,
we do have a solution for you.
And so basically all our
GLKit effects are referenced
through this GLK base effect class.
And what you can do is each GLK base
effect can reference a couple
textures and a couple of lights.
And so we're going to say
we want per-pixel lighting.
The default would be per-vertex lighting.
But we want a nice spot on one texture.
So we're going to set some
light properties here.
We're going to turn on the first light.
We're going to position that light
over where we want the ball to be.
And we're going to say, hey,
we want the cutoff to be 20 degrees.
By default, the cutoff is 180 degrees,
so you get sort of this
general directional light.
And here we're just sort of
narrowing that down a little bit.
And so basically then we're going to
put in our texture that we want lit.
We're going to call prepareToDraw,
which sets up all the shader
variables inside the GLKitBaseEffect.
And then we call our
drawArrays call again.
And here you can see it's, you know,
a much more friendly -- you know,
it's not any more powerful
than what we did before,
but it's just sort of much more friendly,
cocoa-y way of getting the power
of OpenGL ES 2.0 into your app for
doing interesting drawing effects.
The final thing I'd like to cover
in GLKit is this render loop.
So as any of you who've tried
to implement an OpenGL ES app
before have probably noticed,
the first thing you do
is go to Xcode and say,
I want the OpenGL ES 2.0 template.
And what you get is a bunch of files
with four or five pages of code that you
are generally scared to touch because
it looks like it does magical things.
And so, for instance,
it defines a core animation layer
that implements some class that says,
I am really a geo layer.
It knows how to unpack your
view hierarchy out of the nib,
but you have to say, "Hey,
I really want this GL layer to be
opaque so that you're not spending
GPU resources blending that with
whatever's behind it." You have to say,
"Hey, I want this stuff to be
a certain pixel format.
I want it to have the
pixels in this order."
I want to use the
OpenGL ES2 API instead of 1.
And then you have to set up a timer to
tell the core animation display link,
hey, I want to animate at this rate.
And you can pick from a
number of different ways,
but maybe you don't
know which one is best.
And not only that,
so once you've set all that up,
you haven't even started drawing,
then you have to implement this draw
view call where you run your game logic,
and then you have to screw around
with OpenGL frame buffers and make
sure you get a new frame buffer,
you get your content into it,
you present it,
and then you tear it down so that
OpenGL can discard that frame buffer data
and not have to actually page it off.
Or do other expensive things with it.
You have to do all this stuff just
to do a basic OpenGL ES 2.0 app.
And while you only have
to get it right once,
we thought that there was
probably a better way to do this.
So in GL Kit,
we now have this class called GLK View,
and you can just add one of
these to your view hierarchy,
write an interface builder,
and subclass it as you would any
other view that you want to control.
So when your app is done launching,
basically, you're just going to say, hey,
I want to set the delegate for this
GLK view to whatever my game class is.
And I'm going to basically set then
the frame rate that I want to target,
and GLK view will take care of running
the animation at that frame rate.
And there's basically two functions
that as a delegate of the GLK view,
you have to handle.
There's controller update,
and so that's going to get
called whenever your game
logic needs to be updated.
So in our little pong example,
we'd move the paddles up and
down and hit detect the bricks
and all that kind of stuff.
And that's nicely separated
from the drawing call,
which is just where we would
implement any of our custom drawing,
just like we would in
the previous example.
We've really made this much
easier to reason about,
and now OpenGL isn't a special case.
It's just a first-class citizen
in the UIKit view hierarchy,
just like anyone else.
So you've seen how
OpenGLKit lets you adopt ES 2.0,
even if you're not familiar with OpenGL.
And the reason why it's important to
do that is we are building awesome
GPUs into recent iOS devices.
The iPad 2 GPU is fantastically powerful.
As you've seen in some
of the demos already,
you can run complicated shaders
at full-screen resolution
at 60 frames a second.
And you know,
you can use GLKit to get some of those
effects into your app pretty easily.
And so that way,
you can get the power of that hardware
that's in all your customers' devices
without having to be an OpenGL ES expert.
And there is tons of other functionality
in GLKit that I haven't covered today.
And just like the previous two sections,
we have sessions for you to go to
where you can find out more about that.
So, Advances in OpenGL ES for iOS
5 is the main GL Kit session.
That's tomorrow at 2:00 in this room.
If you are interested in some of
the GL Tools stuff that you might
have seen in State of the Union,
those sessions are coming up
later on Wednesday as well.
The final thing I'd like to
talk about today is AirPlay.
And this is actually really
amazing in that how many
people out there own an HDTV?
See, these are the people that you can
target with AirPlay because everyone
has a television and now we're
giving you a way to get content,
your game content, on it.
This is iPad 2 specific,
but you can mirror your game content
if you just want to share the same
screen that's on the iPad on the TV.
But the example we'll walk through today
is using your TV as a second display,
because we think that this enables
some really cool use cases for games.
So I have prepared for you some
excellent slideware of an example
that we thought up and thought,
man, we really hope someone writes this.
So here you can see we have an iPad,
and it's connected to an Apple TV,
and it's asking me to draw an iPad.
You may be familiar with this
game from your childhood.
And so it gives you an area to doodle on,
and you doodle,
and it appears on the television,
and people have to wonder
what it is you're drawing.
So you can see how AirPlay lets
you get game content.
in front of a group of people, and again,
we're going for that social game
experience where multiple people in
a room can all be playing your game
together and having a great time.
So let's look at AirPlay code examples.
There are some really easy ways
that you can get content on there.
UIKit has a new UI screen class.
So if you want to detect the second
display when your app is launched,
you can just say, "Hey, UIScreen,
how many screens are there?" And the
answer is going to be one or two.
So you can say,
"If there's more than one,
I'm going to go ahead and get that
last screen object and do whatever
I need to do to get my content on it."
If you wanted to detect a hot plug,
for instance, someone putting that
HDMI connection into an iPad 2 or
an Apple TV coming online and...
Becoming ready to accept second display.
You can register for a much
shorter notification this time.
The UI screen did connect notification.
And so again,
we're going to go get our default
notification center and just say,
hey, we want to get a call to screen did
connect whenever a screen shows up.
And then again, we're going to go to this
prepare screen function.
And what does prepare screen look like?
Well, we need to get a reference to
the second screen so that we
can create some content on it.
The first thing we're going to do is we
want to create a window on that screen,
and to create a window,
we have to know how
big to make the window.
So we ask the screen for its bounds,
and as you'll see,
this isn't a fixed thing.
We can actually change the
resolution a little bit later.
When we create a UI window
with that size and
So, when we set the screen
property of that UI window,
we switch from being mirrored
display to being a secondary display.
So, the important thing to recognize
here is whenever you create a
window on that second display,
That is what tells the system, "Hey,
this guy is actually trying to use
this to display additional content.
I'll switch out of mirroring
and into second display."
When that last window goes away,
you drop back to mirroring.
So now that we have this window,
we need to get a view in
it and get some content.
So you're just going to create whatever
view controller object you have for the
content that you want to put in there.
You're going to set that
Windows root controller as the
view controller you just created.
And you're going to set that
window's hidden property,
which defaults to true, or yes, to no.
And then that window will
appear and your glorious content
will fill that television.
But say, you know,
maybe you have some relatively, you know,
expensive content to produce
on a per-pixel basis.
UI Screen provides you a way to get
access to the supported resolution
list and then change the resolution.
So many HD televisions support 1080i,
720p, 480p, you know,
maybe you'll get 1024 by 768.
So if you would rather
be in one of those modes,
you can get the list of available
modes and use a UI screen method
to go switch into that mode.
UI screen also provides you with
access to the preferred mode,
which is going to be whatever
our best guess of what looks
best on that screen is.
And so, for instance,
the 720p television,
the preferred mode is going to be 720p.
You can also do some pretty
cool other little things here.
One of the properties I thought
was neat in playing around with
this was the screen brightness.
So, for instance, if I'm doing something,
if I'm bringing the player's
attention back to the iPad,
I can dim that exterior screen while
I'm doing something iPad-centric.
And when I'm done doing it,
I can bring the screen
brightness back up.
There are a few other properties,
but I encourage you to check
out uiscreen.h and go to the
AirPlay session later today at 3:15.
You'll see a whole bunch of
ways that you can use this,
some of which are not game-specific.
So, in summary, we've talked today
about four technologies.
You've seen how Game Center can keep
players interested in your game and
make gaming an awesome social experience
that is rewarding for your players.
For both your players
and you as developers.
You've seen how Cloud Storage can
solve basic problems in gaming
that a lot of people have now and
will enable really cool new uses
of multiple devices in your games.
You've seen how GL Kit can solve
a lot of the basic problems of
adopting OpenGL ES 2.0 in your app
and making the power of OpenGL and
our GPUs accessible to those of
you who are not OpenGL ES experts.
And you've seen how Air Display is
really easy to use and can
really provide some interesting
collaborative game experiences,
or just get your game on the HDTV that
almost everybody already owns.
If you have questions
about any of this stuff,
And you can't, for whatever reason,
make it to one of the sessions
that I showed you earlier.
You can contact Alan Schafer.
He's our Game Technologies Evangelist
in Developer Relations.
You can find us up here at
the stage between sessions.
So part two will be starting about 15
minutes from now in the same convenient
location you are already sitting.
So we hope to see all of you back here.
Graham will talk about the awesome
fundamentals of game design on iOS.
Thank you for spending
your morning with me.
It was wonderful to see you.
I hope you go get some tea
and coffee and danishes.
So thank you very much.